(upbeat jingle)
(keyboard clicking)
Alright so, what is an algorithm?
An algorithm describes the steps you have to perform
to accomplish a specific task.
Now one common example that's often used
when algorithms are being taught is the steps
for making a cup of coffee.
I'm a tea drinker so I'm gonna use tea instead.
And so here's one algorithm for making tea.
In step one we boil water.
In step two we add a teabag to a cup.
In step three we pour the boiling water in to the cup.
In step four we remove the teabag when the tea is ready,
meaning it's steeped to the desired degree
either weak tea, strong tea or tea in between.
In step five we add the desired amount of milk to the cup.
We step six we add the desired amount of sugar to the cup
and in step seven we stir the contents of the cup
with a spoon and our tea is ready.
Now you might be looking at this and thinking
wait a minute that's not how I make tea
I don't put the tea bag in the cup
I put the teabag in to a teapot
and I boil the water and I pour the water in to the teapot
and then I add milk in to the cup before I pour
from the teapot in to the cup
because that burns the milk,
it gives the tea a little bit of a different taste.
But you'll notice that I said
here's one algorithm for making tea,
I didn't say here's the algorithm for making tea.
There can be more than one algorithm
for accomplishing a task
and you'll see when we cover sort algorithms
that there are many ways we can sort data
and so there are many sort algorithms.
There isn't just one sort algorithm
and this is the one and only one way you can sort data.
This algorithm that you're looking at,
the making tea algorithm, makes some assumptions.
It assumes that we're using a teabag
and that we're making the tea directly in the cup as I said
rather than using a teapot.
And it's not unusual for an algorithm to make assumptions.
Some of the sort algorithms we'll cover make assumptions
about the data they're sorting and some don't.
So there can be many algorithms
that accomplish the same task.
Now there's one really important distinction
that you have to understand.
An algorithm is not an implementation,
they're not the same thing.
An algorithm describes the steps you have to perform,
and implementation is the code you write
to perform those steps if we're talking about programming.
There can be many implementations of the same algorithm.
For example, let's look at our making tea algorithm again.
In step one we don't specify how to boil the water
we just say you've gotta boil water
and so it doesn't matter if the water is boiled in a kettle
or in a saucepan or if somebody is boiling it
in a pot over a campfire.
As long as you boil water you're performing step one.
So in the same way when we implement an algorithm
it may be possible to implement a step
in many different ways.
And so in this course I'm going to show you
one implementation of each algorithm that we study
but there can be, and likely are,
other implementations of the algorithm.
So just to drill that home there can be many algorithms
that accomplish the same task,
if you look at the sort algorithms section
you'll see that there's at least eight.
There may be more, we cover the popular ones.
And also there can be many implementations
of the same algorithm.
So I'll show you one implementation
but you may see other implementations
for the same algorithms as long as the code you're writing
is following the steps described by the algorithm
you have an implementation for the algorithm.
Now often the words algorithm and implementation
are used interchangeably even though they're different.
I'll probably do the same thing occasionally.
I may occasionally use algorithm
when I should be using implementation.
So just remember that an algorithm
can have many implementations
and as I said there can be many algorithms
for accomplishing the same task.
So that's algorithms, not terribly complicated.
They just describe the steps you have to perform
to accomplish a specific task.
And so now that we've looked at what a data structure is
and we've looked at what an algorithm is
let's move on and start looking
at our first data structure, the array.
I'll see ya there.